bolt04: Variable `hop_payload` for the sphinx onion (#619)
lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc: 04-onion-routing.md

   Message Authentication Code, as defined by the [FIPS 198
   Standard][fips198]/[RFC 2104][RFC2104], and using a `SHA256` hashing
   algorithm.
 - Elliptic curve: for all computations involving elliptic curves, the Bitcoin
   curve is used, as specified in [`secp256k1`][sec2]
 - Pseudo-random stream: [`ChaCha20`][rfc7539] is used to generate a
   pseudo-random byte stream. For its generation, a fixed null-nonce
   (`0x0000000000000000`) is used, along with a key derived from a shared
   secret and with a `0x00`-byte stream of the desired output size as the
   message.
 - The terms _origin node_ and _final node_ refer to the initial packet sender
   and the final packet recipient, respectively.
 - The terms _hop_ and _node_ are sometimes used interchangeably, but a _hop_
   usually refers to an intermediate node in the route rather than an end node.
 - The term _processing node_ refers to the specific node along the route that is
   currently processing the forwarded packet.
 - The term _peers_ refers only to hops that are direct neighbors (in the
   overlay network): more specifically, _sending peers_ forward packets

>    to_receiving peers_.

Reviewer: nit: missing space between `to` and `receiving`

>  - Route length: the maximum route length is limited to 20 hops.

Reviewer: Is that still true? With the variable-length payload we're able to do more hops than that, and intermediate nodes cannot see the route length so cannot prevent a sender from using more than 20 hops.

Reviewer 2: It's still the max assuming that each hop gets the same amount of forwarding information that it does now. If we're dropping those unused 13 bytes, then there might be some additional wiggle room however.

Author: Removed.

 - Each hop in the route has a variable length `hop_payload`, or a fixed-size
   legacy `hop_data` payload.
    - The legacy `hop_data` is identified by a single `0x00`-byte prefix

> 	- The variable length `hop_payload` is prefixed with a `varint` encoding

Reviewer 3: should specify that this should be `BigSize`?

Reviewer 4: Yes, IMHO we should ban the word `varint` now, and use `bigsize` everywhere in the spec.  Or `BigSize`, but every other type is lower-case.

Reviewer 3: `bigsize` sounds good to me!

Author: As long as we use `bigsize` only for measurements such as the length of a field it's ok imho.

Reviewer 4: Well, we use it for tlv type fields, and gossip query flags, but renaming is a `speling rule` fix IMHO so I don't really care.

 - Elliptic curve: for all computations involving elliptic curves, the Bitcoin
   curve is used, as specified in [`secp256k1`][sec2]
 - Pseudo-random stream: [`ChaCha20`][rfc7539] is used to generate a
   pseudo-random byte stream. For its generation, a fixed null-nonce
   (`0x0000000000000000`) is used, along with a key derived from a shared
   secret and with a `0x00`-byte stream of the desired output size as the
   message.
 - The terms _origin node_ and _final node_ refer to the initial packet sender
   and the final packet recipient, respectively.
 - The terms _hop_ and _node_ are sometimes used interchangeably, but a _hop_
   usually refers to an intermediate node in the route rather than an end node.
        _origin node_ --> _hop_ --> ... --> _hop_ --> _final node_
 - The term _processing node_ refers to the specific node along the route that is
   currently processing the forwarded packet.
 - The term _peers_ refers only to hops that are direct neighbors (in the
   overlay network): more specifically, _sending peers_ forward packets
   to _receiving peers_.
 - Each hop in the route has a variable length `hop_payload`, or a fixed-size
   legacy `hop_data` payload.

>     - The legacy `hop_data` is identified by a single `0x00`-byte prefix

Reviewer 2: Is this prefix in _addition_ to the leading `0x00` realm byte?

Reviewer: I think the wording here is simply getting rid of the `realm` concept.
This leading `0x00` byte prefix is what we called `realm` in the previous version (don't add an additional one otherwise it's not backwards-compatible anymore).

Author: Yep, there is only one `0x00` byte, which used to be called `realm`, and now is just the length encoded as a varint.

2. data:
   * [`1`:`version`]
   * [`33`:`public_key`]
   * [`1300`:`hops_data`]
   * [`32`:`hmac`]

For this specification (_version 0_), `version` has a constant value of `0x00`.

The `hop_payloads` field is a structure that holds obfuscated routing information, and associated HMAC.
It is 1300 bytes long and has the following structure:

1. type: `hop_payloads`
2. data:

>    * [`1-3`:`length`]

Reviewer 2: We also cut off future upgrade paths by removing the realm here. Instead, we can keep the realm and use a fixed size 2-byte integer.

>    * [`1-3`:`length`]

Reviewer: Only if we want to upgrade out of TLV right?
If our stance is that TLV is the future we don't need a realm, the TLV `type` is the effective realm.
But if you think we need a way to move away from TLV in the future, in that case the realm would be needed.
I don't have a strong opinion on that, I think we still have the top-level onion version if we ever need to move away from TLV.

>    * [`1-3`:`length`]

Author: I took a look at this again, and I think it's better to extract the common parts like the patch proposes, and then go into details further down. I'd like to treat the legacy version as a special case of the newer thing, rather than the other way around.

>    * [`1-3`:`length`]

Reviewer 2: > But if you think we need a way to move away from TLV in the future, in that case the realm would be needed.

I have no idea if we'll need to do so in the future, I don't think any of us do. Therefore, we should cautious to ensure we don't box ourselves into the current format without any way to transition away from it.

>    * [`1-3`:`length`]

Reviewer: That's reasonable :)
I believe that we have 2 ways of transitioning away, either with the `0x01` length or with the top-level onion version.
So we should be covered.

   * [`length`:`hop_payload`]
   * [`32`:`HMAC`]
   * ...
   * `filler`

Where, the `length`, `hop_paylod` (with contents dependent on `length`), and `HMAC` are repeated for each hop;
and where, `filler` consists of obfuscated, deterministically-generated padding, as detailed in [Filler Generation](#filler-generation).
Additionally, `hop_payloads` is incrementally obfuscated at each hop.

Using the `hop_payload` field, the origin node is able to specify the path and structure of the HTLCs forwarded at each hop.
As the `hop_payload` is protected under the packet-wide HMAC, the information it contains is fully authenticated with each pair-wise relationship between the HTLC sender (origin node) and each hop in the path.

Using this end-to-end authentication, each hop is able to cross-check the HTLC
parameters with the `hop_payload`'s specified values and to ensure that the
sending peer hasn't forwarded an ill-crafted HTLC.

The `length` field determines both the length and the format of the `hop_payload` field; the following formats are defined:

>  - Legacy `hop_data` format, identified by a `0x00` length.

Author: Yes, a single byte `0x00` is more precise. The second option would be invalid for minimal encoding anyway :-)

2. data:
   * [`1`:`version`]
   * [`33`:`public_key`]
   * [`1300`:`hops_data`]
   * [`32`:`hmac`]

For this specification (_version 0_), `version` has a constant value of `0x00`.

> The `hop_payloads` field is a structure that holds obfuscated routing information, and associated HMAC.

Reviewer: nit: this is still named `hops_data` on line 154. I'm fine with both names but we should use the same everywhere :)

Author: No, the difference really is between `hop_payloads` which is a collection of either `hop_data` or `hop_payload` values, pluralization matters in this case :-)

It is 1300 bytes long and has the following structure:

1. type: `hop_payloads`
2. data:
   * [`1-3`:`length`]
   * [`length`:`hop_payload`]
   * [`32`:`HMAC`]
   * ...
   * `filler`

> Where, the `length`, `hop_paylod` (with contents dependent on `length`), and `HMAC` are repeated for each hop;

Reviewer: nit: `hop_payload` instead of `hop_paylod`

2. data:
   * [`1`:`version`]
   * [`33`:`public_key`]

>    * [`1300`:`hops_data`]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * [`1300`:`hop_payloads`]
```

     leaking its position in the route.

   * `padding`: This field is for future use and also for ensuring that future non-0-`realm`
     `hop_data`s won't change the overall `hop_payloads` size.

When forwarding HTLCs, nodes MUST construct the outgoing HTLC as specified
within `hop_data` above; otherwise, deviation from the specified HTLC
parameters may lead to extraneous routing failure.

### `tlv_payload` payload format

This is a more flexible format, which avoids the redundant `short_channel_id` field for the final node. 

1. tlv: `tlv_payload`
2. types:
    1. type: 2 (`amt_to_forward`)
    2. data:

>         * [`integer`:`amt_to_forward`]

Reviewer: What do you mean by `integer` here?
I would have defined it like this:

- [`varint`:`0x02`] (`type`) (`amt_to_forward`)
- [`varint`:`length`]
- [`length`:`amt_to_forward`]

Another note (more about TLV): I think this should be a TLV for a more generic `amount_msat` type that can be used everywhere we need to encode an amount in msat. This is orthogonal to this PR (and should probably be done afterwards) but I think we should move the definition of often-used TLVs to a specific file and reference it from here.

Same for the other TLVs defined below.

Author: These really are TLV types, hence the use of `integer` as the shortest possible representation of the numeric value we want to transfer. Indeed this ends up being a short-hand for what you write, however it was copy-pasted from #604 by @rustyrussell. If possible I'd like to keep the shorthand since it gets unwieldy to read otherwise.

     leaking its position in the route.

   * `padding`: This field is for future use and also for ensuring that future non-0-`realm`
     `hop_data`s won't change the overall `hop_payloads` size.

When forwarding HTLCs, nodes MUST construct the outgoing HTLC as specified
within `hop_data` above; otherwise, deviation from the specified HTLC
parameters may lead to extraneous routing failure.

### `tlv_payload` payload format

This is a more flexible format, which avoids the redundant `short_channel_id` field for the final node. 

1. tlvs: `tlv_payload`
2. types:
    1. type: 2 (`amt_to_forward`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu64`:`amt_to_forward`]
    1. type: 4 (`outgoing_cltv_value`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu32`:`outgoing_cltv_value`]
    1. type: 6 (`short_channel_id`)
    2. data:

>         * [`short_channel_id`:`short_channel_id`]

Reviewer: I think it could be a good idea! I don't see any issue changing this to `tu64` on our side.

>         * [`short_channel_id`:`short_channel_id`]

Author: Should be good for us as well, since we keep the `short_channel_id`s in their numeric form internally.

>         * [`short_channel_id`:`short_channel_id`]

Author: Might be worth having a document that maps internal values to their wire and TLV representations respectively.

     leaking its position in the route.

   * `padding`: This field is for future use and also for ensuring that future non-0-`realm`
     `hop_data`s won't change the overall `hop_payloads` size.

When forwarding HTLCs, nodes MUST construct the outgoing HTLC as specified
within `hop_data` above; otherwise, deviation from the specified HTLC
parameters may lead to extraneous routing failure.

### `tlv_payload` payload format

This is a more flexible format, which avoids the redundant `short_channel_id` field for the final node. 

> 1. tlv: `tlv_payload`

Reviewer 4: Trivial: we're using `tlvs:` for tlv stream descriptions, otherwise tools/extract-formats.py won't extract.

2. types:
    1. type: 0 (`destination_signal`)
    2. data:

> 	    * Empty

Reviewer 4: Oh, and since there's no data at all, you can simply skip these two lines and it will parse correctly.

     leaking its position in the route.

   * `padding`: This field is for future use and also for ensuring that future non-0-`realm`
     `hop_data`s won't change the overall `hop_payloads` size.

When forwarding HTLCs, nodes MUST construct the outgoing HTLC as specified
within `hop_data` above; otherwise, deviation from the specified HTLC
parameters may lead to extraneous routing failure.

### `tlv_payload` payload format

This is a more flexible format, which avoids the redundant `short_channel_id` field for the final node. 

1. tlv: `tlv_payload`
2. types:
    1. type: 2 (`amt_to_forward`)
    2. data:

>         * [`integer`:`amt_to_forward`]

Reviewer 3: i assumed that if it were fixed-size, it would have been denoted as `8` like `short_chan_id`, but should clarify

>         * [`integer`:`amt_to_forward`]

Author: We can change the type (length) to read `varint` if that makes things easier :wink:

>         * [`integer`:`amt_to_forward`]

Reviewer 3: `varint` as in `CompactSize`?

    1. type: 4 (`outgoing_cltv_value`)
    2. data:
        * [`integer`:`outgoing_cltv_value`]
    1. type: 6 (`short_channel_id`)
    2. data:
        * [`8`:`short_channel_id`]

### Requirements

The writer:
  - MUST include `amt_to_forward` and `outgoing_cltv_value` for every node.
  - MUST include `short_channel_id` for every non-final node.
  - MUST NOT include `short_channel_id` for the final node.

The reader:
  - MUST return an error if `amt_to_forward` or `outgoing_cltv_value` are not present.

>   - MUST return an error if it is not the final node and `short_channel_id` is not present.

Reviewer 3: Given that the proposal currently uses the HMAC to signal the exit hop, enforcing these requires a lookahead since the HMAC follows the TLV payload or remembering which types the TLV payload contained when checking the HMAC :( Ideally the final hop would be signaled before parsing the TLV payload, making it possible to enforce these requirements while parsing the packet linearly. 

Perhaps this is another argument for signaling the final hop in the realm byte and dropping the final HMAC?

Author: I think we should add a signal in the TLV (making it a low type such that it gets processed first)?

Reviewer: That means that the onion processing layer needs to parse and interpret the TLV stream to look for a particular TLV type though, isn't this a layering violation? Whereas signaling via the `realm` byte might be a bit cleaner, don't you think?

     leaking its position in the route.

   * `padding`: This field is for future use and also for ensuring that future non-0-`realm`
     `hop_data`s won't change the overall `hop_payloads` size.

When forwarding HTLCs, nodes MUST construct the outgoing HTLC as specified
within `hop_data` above; otherwise, deviation from the specified HTLC
parameters may lead to extraneous routing failure.

### `tlv_payload` payload format

This is a more flexible format, which avoids the redundant `short_channel_id` field for the final node. 

1. tlv: `tlv_payload`
2. types:

>     1. type: 0 (`destination_signal`)

Reviewer 2: So we have both a signal here and also a final set of zero bytes in the HMAC? I'm not sure we need another signal on this level, given that in the underlying Sphinx format, the zero'd HMAC is used as a tag for the final destination. This would also create two ways that packet processors are required to know of in order to determine if this is the final hop or not. This framing layer sits above the current onion layer IMO, meaning we're crossing layers here in order to detect a terminal point in the route.

Reviewer 2: Or will the HMAC be left in place, and this is just for the higher level TLV parser?

Reviewer: I currently kept both conditions in my implementation. If either the next packet's hmac is `0x00` or if the first byte of the TLV stream is `0x00` it means we are the last hop.
Instead of using TLV code inside the onion processor, I translated this condition as `the first byte after the varint length of the payload is 0x00` (since TLV streams are ordered by TLV type values and this one as type `0x00`).
I don't have a strong opinion on what we should do here because it's not necessarily the onion processor layer that need to figure out that we are the destination, it might make more sense that it's the layer that interprets the payload that should figure out that we are the destination.

Reviewer 4: If we leave the HMAC, we should continue to use it to signal termination.

Half-parsing the TLV this way is just nasty, as is the alternative of using type 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF to signal the HMAC (which, of course would always put it at the end), which loses more bytes across any normal route than skipping the terminal HMAC would!

    2. data:
	    * Empty
    1. type: 2 (`amt_to_forward`)
    2. data:

>         * [`integer`:`amt_to_forward`]

Reviewer 2: Still not clear what `integer` is from strictly reading this document. I think using `varint` here makes it more clear when combined with #622.

    1. type: 4 (`outgoing_cltv_value`)
    2. data:
        * [`integer`:`outgoing_cltv_value`]

>     1. type: 6 (`short_channel_id`)

Reviewer 3: thoughts?

>     1. type: 6 (`short_channel_id`)

Reviewer: I think this makes sense for TLVs containing a single field, but it might be confusing because TLVs containing multiple fields can't use the same format...

>     1. type: 6 (`short_channel_id`)

Reviewer 3: was thinking structs could be defined elsewhere, and keep all definitions as a single line, e.g.
```
1. type 42: (`struct`: `struct_name`)
```

>     1. type: 6 (`short_channel_id`)

Reviewer: That's a good idea, a dedicated section that contains all the TLVs used by the onion namespace could be useful.

>     1. type: 6 (`short_channel_id`)

Reviewer 4: We can change it later, but whoever changes it also has to change the tooling to match.  As long as they do that, I'm happy with any readable format!

But until then, no, it must be parsable by tools/extract-formats.py.

    2. data:

>         * [`8`:`short_channel_id`]

Reviewer 5: I'd like to bring up an item from the 2018 Lightning Summit: Should we use the introduction of a new onion format as an opportunity to switch to next hop pubkeys instead of short channel ids? Mentioned advantages:
* Greater deniability for unadvertised nodes, can use ephemeral pubkeys when connecting to “gateway” (edge) nodes
* Possibly opens up to allow onion overlay (not sure what that is)

And also:

* Shorter hop hints for private channels, as they only need to include a pubkey.
* Possible implementation advantages because of simplification of data structures (like for example `route`).

Reviewer: While this would be a great addition, I feel that it should be a separate change. The current PR is about the encoding format of payloads, not really about their contents and routing logic (and this PR is already a big change and adding a new change like that would trigger many new discussions that are irrelevant to the variable-length payload).

I think it would be cleaner to use a dedicated feature-flag (something like `pubkey_onion_routing`) separate from the `var_onion_optin` flag. Or bundle this with a few other onion tlvs that would enable multiple routing improvements?

A small drawback is that a `public_key` uses more bytes than a `short_channel_id`, so I think that nodes would support both options.

Reviewer 5: The reason for proposing it here, is to explore whether we see an advantage in not having both options.

Reviewer: I think it would be limiting to completely drop support of `short_channel_id` in favor of `public_key`. In cases where we'll want to put more information in the onion (rendezvous, trampoline, stuckless payments, etc), space will be scarce if we still want to guarantee a good anonymity set (via a potentially long route) so it's useful to have something shorter than a `public_key` to identify the next hop.

Author: I think it's probably a good idea to have that discussion in its own PR like @t-bast suggested. I already removed the requirement for there to be a `short_channel_id` (the text was forcing us to error out if no `short_channel_id` is present so far, see last commit). This allows us to then simply switch out the `short_channel_id` for any other form of addressing.

One option for addressing would also be to have a small local peer ID, i.e., a node announces a small integer ID for each of its peers that can be used as an alias when routing. The reason being that this alias only has to make sense to the processing node, hence we can use small integers. More on this in a separate discussion.

I just feel this change has been hanging in limbo for far too long, despite everybody agreeing that it is something that we desperately need (this is the 3rd iteration of this general concept), and there are quite a few interesting things that are being blocked by this. Let's not add more details that can be trivially deferred to later.

Reviewer 5: Fair points. I just wanted to check whether we don't see it as a missed opportunity to hard switch to a different addressing mode in this new onion format. As it is clear that pubkey addressing isn't something that we unanimously want as the only addressing mode, this can indeed be deferred to later.

Once the sender has all the required information above, it can construct the
packet. Constructing a packet routed over `r` hops requires `r` 32-byte
ephemeral public keys, `r` 32-byte shared secrets, `r` 32-byte blinding factors,
and `r`variable length `hop_payload` payloads.
The construction returns a single 1366-byte packet along with the first receiving peer's address.

The packet construction is performed in the reverse order of the route, i.e.
the last hop's operations are applied first.

The packet is initialized with 1366 `0x00`-bytes.

A filler is generated (see [Filler Generation](#filler-generation)) using the shared secret.

For each hop in the route, in reverse order, the sender applies the
following operations:

 - The _rho_-key and _mu_-key are generated using the hop's shared secret.

>  - `shift_size` is defined as the length of the `hop_payload` plus the varint encoding of the length and the length of that HMAC. Thus if the payload is `l` then the `shift_size` is `1 + l + 32` for `l < 253`, otherwise `3 + l + 32` due to the varint encoding of `l`.

Author: Yeah, I didn't implement the Go version, so I can replace the code with the C version only.

>  - `shift_size` is defined as the length of the `hop_payload` plus the varint encoding of the length and the length of that HMAC. Thus if the payload is `l` then the `shift_size` is `1 + l + 32` for `l < 253`, otherwise `3 + l + 32` due to the varint encoding of `l`.

Reviewer 2: Gotcha, after I update can slot it in.

Once the sender has all the required information above, it can construct the
packet. Constructing a packet routed over `r` hops requires `r` 32-byte
ephemeral public keys, `r` 32-byte shared secrets, `r` 32-byte blinding factors,

> and `r`variable length `hop_payload` payloads.

Reviewer: nit: missing space

and `r` variable length `hop_payload` payloads.
The construction returns a single 1366-byte packet along with the first receiving peer's address.

The packet construction is performed in the reverse order of the route, i.e.
the last hop's operations are applied first.

The packet is initialized with 1366 `0x00`-bytes.

A filler is generated (see [Filler Generation](#filler-generation)) using the shared secret.

For each hop in the route, in reverse order, the sender applies the
following operations:

 - The _rho_-key and _mu_-key are generated using the hop's shared secret.
 - `shift_size` is defined as the length of the `hop_payload` plus the varint encoding of the length and the length of that HMAC. Thus if the payload length is `l` then the `shift_size` is `1 + l + 32` for `l < 253`, otherwise `3 + l + 32` due to the varint encoding of `l`.
 - The `hop_payload` field is right-shifted by `shift_size` bytes, discarding the last `shift_size`
 bytes that exceed its 1300-byte size.
 - The varint-serialized length, serialized `hop_payload` and `HMAC` are copied into the following `shift_size` bytes.
 - The _rho_-key is used to generate 1300 bytes of pseudo-random byte stream

>  which is then applied, with `XOR`, to the `hops_data` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 which is then applied, with `XOR`, to the `hop_payloads` field.
```

The routing information is then deobfuscated, and the information about the
next hop is extracted.
To do so, the processing node copies the `hop_payloads` field, appends 1300 `0x00`-bytes,

> generates `2*1300` pseudo-random bytes (using the _rho_-key), and applies the result, using `XOR`, to the copy of the `hops_data`.

Reviewer: nit: `hops_data` should be `hop_payloads`?

The routing information is then deobfuscated, and the information about the
next hop is extracted.
To do so, the processing node copies the `hop_payloads` field, appends 1300 `0x00`-bytes,
generates `2*1300` pseudo-random bytes (using the _rho_-key), and applies the result, using `XOR`, to the copy of the `hop_payloads`.
The first few bytes correspond to the varint-encoded length `l` of the `hop_payload`, followed by `l` bytes of the resulting routing information become the `hop_payload`, and the 32 byte HMAC.
The next 1300 bytes are the `hop_payloads` for the outgoing packet.

> A special `HMAC` value of 32 `0x00`-bytes indicates that the currently processing hop is the intended recipient and that the packet should not be forwarded.

Reviewer 2: That would create yet another special case. We can maintain a stronger separation of layers b signalling termination at the onion layer, rather than at the "application" layer, otherwise TLV code is _required_ in order to test if one's Sphinx construction/processing code is compliant.
